# Clustering concordance - simulation evaluation

This repository contains the simulation studies employed in Smith (forthcoming).

Analyses and results are contained within the `data-raw` directory.

To reproduce the simulation workflow, execute the `.R` scripts in numerical sequence.

## R scripts

### Configuration and simulation

- `_config.R`: Sets up the analysis and defines utility functions.
  Edit this file to specify:
  - The size of the tree and the datasets to be simulated.
  - The location of your own executables of
    [TNT](https://www.lillo.org.ar/phylogeny/tnt/),
    [MrBayes](https://nbisweden.github.io/MrBayes/download.html) and
    [IQ-TREE](https://iqtree.github.io/#download).
  - Your HPC login credentials.

- `10_simluate.R`: Simulates alignments using six rate categories drawn from a discretized gamma distribution.

  Outputs:
    - `reference-gam.tre`: Reference topology used for simulation, in newick format;
    - `alignments/gam####.nex`: Simulated alignment in NEXUS format; `####` denotes replicate ID.


### Inference and support calculation

- `20_MrBayes.R`: Conduct Bayesian inference locally in MrBayes.

  Inputs: 
  - Alignments generated by `10_simluate.R`;
  - `mb-gam.nex`: MrBayes block, in NEXUS format, specifying analytical parameters.

  Outputs:
  - `MrBayes/gam####.con.tre`: Majority-rule consensus tree in Nexus format;
  - `MrBayes/gam####.con.parts`: Partition identifiers in plain text format;
  - `MrBayes/gam####.con.pstat`: Parameter estimates (tree length, alpha) in tabular format;
  - `MrBayes/gam####.con.tstat`: Split probabilities in tabular format.

- `20_MrBayes_HPC.R`: Alternatively, use SLURM template `slurm.sh` to schedule Bayesian inference analyses on a remote server.

- `25_MrBayes_HPC_retrieve.R`: Retrieve available output files from completed tasks on remote server.

- `30_iqtree.R`: Conduct maximum likelihood analysis using IQ-TREE.

  Inputs: 
  - Alignments generated by `10_simluate.R`.

  Outputs: 
  - `gam####.phy.splits.nex`: Split identifiers and support values in NEXUS format.
  - `gam####.phy.treefile`: Maximum likelihood tree with edge lengths, in Newick format.

- `40_tnt.R`: Conduct parsimony analysis in TNT.
  Inputs: 
  - Alignments generated by `10_simluate.R`.
  - `tnt-ew.run`: TNT script for parsimony analysis and calculation of edge support.
  - `bremer.run`: TNT script to compute Bremer support, from Goloboff _et al._ (2008).

  Outputs:
  `gam####.ew.out`: Single most parsimonious tree with edge support values, in TNT format.


### Analysis and visualization

Scripts that process the outputs obtained above to compute and display statistics.
Calculation results are cached on first calculation in the `alignments`, `concordance` and `entropy` subdirectories.

- `110_byEdge.R`: Edgewise character concordance statistics.

- `120_byChar.R`: Characterwise character concordance statistics.


## References

Goloboff, P.A., Farris, J.S., and Nixon, K.C. (2008) TNT, a free program for phylogenetic analysis. _Cladistics_ 24(5): 774--786. 
doi:[10.1111/j.1096-0031.2008.00217.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1096-0031.2008.00217.x)

Smith, M.R. (forthcoming). Which characters support which clades? Exploring the distribution of phylogenetic signal using concordant information.

